feat: add blog on using prisma postgres with workers (#1)
ankur-arch/cloudflare-docs: src/content/docs/workers/tutorials/using-prisma-postgres-with-workers/index.mdx

---
updated: 2025-02-12
difficulty: Beginner
content_type: 📝 Tutorial
pcx_content_type: tutorial
title: Set up and use a Prisma Postgres database
languages:
  - TypeScript
  - SQL
  - Prisma ORM
  - PostgreSQL
---

> [Prisma Postgres](https://www.prisma.io/postgres) is a managed-PostgreSQL database that has built-in connection pooling, caching, real-time subscriptions, and query optimization recommendations.

Reviewer: Maybe add the bit about unikernals and free tier

Author: ```suggestion
Prisma Postgres is a managed, serverless PostgreSQL database built on unikernels. It supports features like connection pooling, caching, real-time subscriptions, and query optimization recommendations. A free tier is available for initial development and testing.
```

```

Then navigate into your project:

```sh
cd ./prisma-postgres-worker
```

Your initial `src/index.ts` file contains a simple request handler:

```ts title="src/index.ts"
export default {
	async fetch(request, env, ctx): Promise<Response> {
		return new Response("Hello World!");
	},
} satisfies ExportedHandler<Env>;
```

## 2. Setup Prisma in your project

In this step, we set up Prisma ORM with a Prisma Postgres database using the CLI. Then we'll create and execute helper scripts to create tables in our database and generate a Prisma client to query it.

### 2.1. Install required dependencies

Install Prisma CLI as a dev dependency:

```sh
npm install prisma --save-dev
```

Install the [Prisma Accelerate client extension](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@prisma/extension-accelerate) as that's required for Prisma Postgres:

```sh
npm i @prisma/extension-accelerate
```

Install the [`dotenv-cli` package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dotenv-cli) to load environment variables from `.dev.vars`:

```sh
npm i -D dotenv-cli
```

### 2.2. Create a Prisma Postgres database and initialize Prisma

Initialize Prisma in your application:

```sh
npx prisma@latest init --db
```

> If you don't have an account yet, or if you are not logged in, the command will prompt you to log in using one of the available authentication providers. A browser window will open so you can log in or create an account. Return to the CLI after you have completed this step.

Author: ```suggestion
If you don't have a [Prisma Data Platform](https://console.prisma.io/) account yet, or if you are not logged in, the command will prompt you to log in using one of the available authentication providers. A browser window will open so you can log in or create an account. Return to the CLI after you have completed this step.
```

Once logged in (or if you were already logged in), the CLI will prompt you to select a project name and a database region.

After the command runs successfully, it will create:

> - A `prisma` folder containing `schema.prisma`, where you will define your database schema.
> - An `.env` file in the project root, which will contain the Prisma Postgres database url `DATABASE_URL=<your-prisma-postgres-database-url>`.

Author: ```suggestion
- A project in your [Platform Console](https://console.prisma.io/) containing a Prisma Postgres database instance.
- A `prisma` folder containing `schema.prisma`, where you will define your database schema.
- An `.env` file in the project root, which will contain the Prisma Postgres database url `DATABASE_URL=<your-prisma-postgres-database-url>`.
```

---
updated: 2025-02-12
difficulty: Beginner
content_type: 📝 Tutorial
pcx_content_type: tutorial
title: Set up and use a Prisma Postgres database
languages:
  - TypeScript
  - SQL
  - Prisma ORM
  - PostgreSQL
---

> Prisma Postgres is a managed, serverless PostgreSQL database built on unikernels. It supports features like connection pooling, caching, real-time subscriptions, and query optimization recommendations. A free tier is available for initial development and testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Prisma Postgres](https://www.prisma.io/postgres) is a managed, serverless PostgreSQL database built on unikernels. It supports features like connection pooling, caching, real-time subscriptions, and query optimization recommendations. A generous free tier is available for initial development, testing and hobby projects.
```

In this tutorial, you will learn how to:

> - Set up a Cloudflare workers project with [Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/docs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Set up a Cloudflare Workers project with [Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/docs).
```

> - Create a Prisma Postgres instance from the CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create a Prisma Postgres instance from the Prisma CLI.
- Model data and run migrations with Prisma Postgres.
```

- Query the database from Workers.

> - Deploy the worker to Cloudflare.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Deploy the Worker to Cloudflare.
```

## Prerequisites

To follow this guide, ensure you have the following:

- Node.js `v18.18` or higher installed.
- An active [Cloudflare account](https://dash.cloudflare.com/).
- A basic familiarity with installing and using command-line interface (CLI) applications.

## 1. Create a new Worker project

Begin by using [C3](/pages/get-started/c3/) to create a Worker project in the command line:

```sh

> npm create cloudflare@latest prisma-postgres-worker -- --type=hello-world --ts=true --git=true --deploy=false

Reviewer 2: nice that you include all options in the command already, makes it very easy for me to create the project 💯

```

Then navigate into your project:

```sh
cd ./prisma-postgres-worker
```

> Your initial `src/index.ts` file contains a simple request handler:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your initial `src/index.ts` file currently contains a simple request handler:
```

```ts title="src/index.ts"
export default {
	async fetch(request, env, ctx): Promise<Response> {
		return new Response("Hello World!");
	},
} satisfies ExportedHandler<Env>;
```

## 2. Setup Prisma in your project

In this step, we set up Prisma ORM with a Prisma Postgres database using the CLI. Then we'll create and execute helper scripts to create tables in our database and generate a Prisma client to query it.

### 2.1. Install required dependencies

Install Prisma CLI as a dev dependency:

```sh
npm install prisma --save-dev
```

Install the [Prisma Accelerate client extension](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@prisma/extension-accelerate) as that's required for Prisma Postgres:

```sh

> npm i @prisma/extension-accelerate

Reviewer 2: let's be consistent with spelling out `npm install` (otherwise always use the abbreviation)

```suggestion
npm install @prisma/extension-accelerate
```

```

Install the [`dotenv-cli` package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dotenv-cli) to load environment variables from `.dev.vars`:

```sh

> npm i -D dotenv-cli

Reviewer 2: same here, let's be consistent with installing dev deps: 

```suggestion
npm install dotenv-cli --save-dev
```

```

### 2.2. Create a Prisma Postgres database and initialize Prisma

Initialize Prisma in your application:

```sh
npx prisma@latest init --db
```

If you don't have a [Prisma Data Platform](https://console.prisma.io/) account yet, or if you are not logged in, the command will prompt you to log in using one of the available authentication providers. A browser window will open so you can log in or create an account. Return to the CLI after you have completed this step.

Once logged in (or if you were already logged in), the CLI will prompt you to select a project name and a database region.

> After the command runs successfully, it will create:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the command has terminated, it has created:
```

- A project in your [Platform Console](https://console.prisma.io/) containing a Prisma Postgres database instance.
- A `prisma` folder containing `schema.prisma`, where you will define your database schema.
- An `.env` file in the project root, which will contain the Prisma Postgres database url `DATABASE_URL=<your-prisma-postgres-database-url>`.

> You will use a `.dev.vars` file instead of the created `.env` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that Cloudflare Workers don't support `.env` files. You will use a file called `.dev.vars` instead of the `.env` file that was just created.
```

### 2.3. Prepare environment variables

> Create a `.dev.vars` file in the root of your application and copy the `DATABASE_URL` from the `.env` file. You can also do this via the CLI:
> 
> ```sh
> cp .env .dev.vars
> ```
> 
> Then, you can remove the `.env` file.

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
Rename the `.env` file in the root of your application to  `.dev.vars` file:

```sh
mv .env .dev.vars
```
````

### 2.4. Apply database schema changes

Open the `schema.prisma` file in the `prisma` folder and add the following `User` model to your database:

```prisma title="prisma/schema.prisma"
generator client {
  provider = "prisma-client-js"
}

datasource db {
  provider = "postgresql"
  url      = env("DATABASE_URL")
}

model User {
  id  Int @id @default(autoincrement())
  email String
	name 	String
}
```

Next, add the following helper scripts to the `scripts` section of your `package.json`:

```json title="package.json"
"scripts": {
  "migrate": "dotenv -e .dev.vars -- npx prisma migrate dev",
	"generate": "dotenv -e .dev.vars -- npx prisma generate --no-engine",
	"studio": "dotenv -e .dev.vars -- npx prisma studio",
  // Additional worker scripts...
}
```

Run the migration script to apply changes to the database:

```sh
npm run migrate
```

When prompted, provide a name for the migration (e.g., `init`).

After these steps are complete, Prisma ORM is fully set up and connected to your Prisma Postgres database.

## 3. Develop the application

> Modify the `src/index.ts` file with the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modify the `src/index.ts` file and replace its contents with the following code:
```

```ts title="src/index.ts"

> import { PrismaClient } from "@prisma/client/edge";
> import { withAccelerate } from "@prisma/extension-accelerate";
> 
> export interface Env {
> 	DATABASE_URL: string;
> }
> 
> export default {
> 	async fetch(request, env, ctx): Promise<Response> {
> 		const prisma = new PrismaClient({
> 			datasourceUrl: env.DATABASE_URL,
> 		}).$extends(withAccelerate());
> 
> 		await prisma.user.create({
> 			data: {
> 				email: `Jon${Math.ceil(Math.random() * 1000)}@gmail.com`,
> 				name: "Jon Doe",
> 			},
> 		});
> 
> 		const userCount = await prisma.user.count();
> 
> 		return new Response(`Number of users in the database: ${userCount}`);
> 	},
> } satisfies ExportedHandler<Env>;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { PrismaClient } from "@prisma/client/edge";
import { withAccelerate } from "@prisma/extension-accelerate";

export interface Env {
	DATABASE_URL: string;
}

export default {
	async fetch(request, env, ctx): Promise<Response> {
		const prisma = new PrismaClient({
			datasourceUrl: env.DATABASE_URL,
		}).$extends(withAccelerate());

		const user = await prisma.user.create({
			data: {
				email: `Jon${Math.ceil(Math.random() * 1000)}@gmail.com`,
				name: "Jon Doe",
			},
		});

		const userCount = await prisma.user.count();

		return new Response(`\
Created new user: ${user.name} (${user.email}).
Number of users in the database: ${userCount}.
		`);
	},
} satisfies ExportedHandler<Env>;
```

```

Run the development server:

```sh
npm run dev
```

> Visit `https://localhost:8787` to see your app in action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Visit [`https://localhost:8787`](https://localhost:8787) to see your app in action.
```

## 4. Deploy the application to Cloudflare

> Use the [`npx wrangler secret put` command](/workers/configuration/secrets/#adding-secrets-to-your-project) to upload the `DATABASE_URL`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the application is deployed to Cloudflare, it needs access to the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable that's defined locally in `.dev.vars`. You can use the [`npx wrangler secret put`](/workers/configuration/secrets/#adding-secrets-to-your-project) command to upload the `DATABASE_URL` to the deployment environment:
```

```sh
npx wrangler secret put DATABASE_URL
```

> When prompted, paste the `DATABASE_URL` value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When prompted, paste the `DATABASE_URL` value (from `.dev.vars`).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I also received this prompt before I was able to run `npm run deploy`: 

> ✔ There doesn't seem to be a Worker called "prisma-postgres-worker". Do you want to create a new Worker with that name and add secrets to it? … yes

Maybe we should mention it here too?

Author: @nikolasburk Good point!

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0505e9e1-3bbc-4c3f-bd21-987b8d52a85f)

Then execute the following command to deploy your project to Cloudflare Workers:

```sh
npm run deploy
```

The `wrangler` CLI will bundle and upload your application.

> If you’re not already logged in, the `wrangler` CLI will open a browser window prompting you to log in to the [Cloudflare dashboard](https://dash.cloudflare.com/).
> :::note

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you’re not already logged in, the `wrangler` CLI will open a browser window prompting you to log in to the [Cloudflare dashboard](https://dash.cloudflare.com/).

:::note
```
